# Zettelkasten

In German, "Zettelkasten" means "slip box". It's a place where you can store all your information to create a system of references to connect to one another.

The famous german sociologist Niklas Luhmann used one of these as a litteral locker to store all his references.
I wanted to do the same thing but digitally.
As I am using LaTeX to write my documents, I wanted a system that allows me to use the bibliography managment of LaTeX, while at the same time allowing me to access all the sources and their properties easy via the commandline.
Not only do I want to be able to store all my sources, I also want to store information on what I have read and where to find it as well as specific citations I find relevant without having to remember everything.

------
## Purpose

There are many citiation software projects out there and there are many stable note taking systems (e.g. Obisidian) that work around a markup language like markdown.
So why this one, why was it created?

The purpose of the program is to create an enviroment **around** Doom Emacs and Org Roam (UI), that allows safe storage of sources and citations (direct or indirect) in a seperate system, that is independant of Emacs.
This means, that notes inside of your org-roam files can be taken, created, deleted, edited and whatever else you do with it.
All the sources you want to track are stored inside of these org files in the form of codeblocks.
This program then simply extracts all this data from said codeblocks and transfers them into a seperate database.
On the one hand, this design has the advantage of still working, even if you Emacs crashes.
You basically check in all the new entries you have at regular intervals (cronjob, manual script-triggering, whatever you like).

You can then query the database in the terminal, here's an example:

`zk query -c author -s "Friedrich Nietzsche" -o title`

This command will query the database for all books by Friedrich Nietzsche and output their title.

## Basic notions

Before presenting the different commands, here are some notions that are used throughout the project:
- **"zk"**: means Zettelkasten, an abbreviation for this program.
- **"source"** means a literal source of something, like a book, scientific article or a chapter in a book
- **"quote"**: A literal citation in a source.
- **"datapoint"**: In indirect citation in a source.

## Workflow

How do you use the program?

1. Write notes inside your emacs org-roam files (or just general org-files, they just have to be in one central directory).
2. Add your sources in the form of codeblocks (there are snippets for yas inside this project). Give each source a citekey (it will later be used in LaTeX) and the relevant data. You can put any source anywhere in the files, the location will be safed to the database. Also add tags to your sources to give them topics.
3. Add quotes and datapoints in the same manner. Add the citekeys from the sources to their codeblock as they will later be used to relate sources to citations.
4. Let the programm scan all your files (`zk compile`)
5. After adding all the content to the database, either use it to find information or create bibfiles for LaTeX from all your sources (`zk bibfile -a` or `zk bibfile -m`). They will be autogenerated from your database. For each tag (or a specific one) a bibfile will be created, containing all related source entries.
6. Use your bibfiles to write LaTeX documents. I personally don't do that in Emacs, but do whatever you like.

This project also contains a lot of helper scripts that allow easier access and conversion of types and files, e.g.:
- `dmenu`-scripts (or use wofi or whatever, there is a variable for chosing a menu inside the config) to:
	- search citekeys or titles and put them into the clipboard
	- to convert bibfiles in your Download dir to source entries for this program

----
## Use Cases

This repository has different use cases:
1. Put all your sources, direct and indirect citations in codeblocks in Emacs Org files (I designed the project around org roam).
2. Collect these sources from you org roam files and put them into the database.
3. Query the database for e.g. "What sources with Friedrich Nietzsche being the author do I have?" (command: zk query -c author -s "Friedrich Nietzsche")
4. Convert all your sources from the database into LaTeX Bibtex files based on the tags.

TODO This manual has to be expanded to fully reveal the full workflow and functionality. This is currently a stub.

